---
layout: default
title: Bent Pipe Radio Model
nav_order: 13
permalink: /bent-pipe-radio-model
---


# Bent Pipe Radio Model

The Bent Pipe radio model is a generic regenerative bent-pipe (u-bend)
satellite model. The model supports configuration of one or more
transponders, where each transponder may operate in `ubend` or
`process` mode. A transponder operating in `ubend` mode will relay any
successfully received over-the-air uplink frame over its downlink
channel. A transponder operating in `process` mode will forward any
successfully received over-the-air frame up the stack for processing.
Bent Pipe differentiates between operating as a satellite or ground
station solely based on transponder configuration, specifically the
configuration parameter `transponder.receive.action` either set to
`ubend` or `process`, and can be configured as a satellite with
inter-satellite links by using a combination of `ubend` and `process`
transponders.

## Features

The Bent Pipe radio model provides the following set of features:
[Multiple Transponders](#multiple-transponders), [Configurable Channel
Access](#configurable-channel-access), [Multiple
Antenna](#multiple-antenna), [Aggregation and
Fragmentation](#aggregation-and-fragmentation), [Boundary Transponder
Selection](#boundary-transponder-selection), and [Packet Completion
Rate Curves](#packet-completion-rate-curves).

### Multiple Transponders

The Bent Pipe radio model can be configured with multiple transponders
where each is configured using a set of configuration parameters with
a `<transponder index>:<value>` format. Where `<transponder index>` is
a 0 based sequential index used to identify the transponders
instantiated by the model.

Each transponder needs both receive and transmit configuration and
must be included as an entry in each of the `transponder.receiver.*`
and `transponder.transmit.*` configuration parameter values.

Failure to include a referenced transponder in any of the required
configuration, using non-sequential transponder indices, or mixing
`na` and non-`na` values for the same transponder in
`transponder.transmit.*` TDMA channel access parameters, will result
in a configuration exception at emulator start.

The below radio model XML snippet from `node-1` in the `bentpipe-01`
example shows `transponder.receiver.*` configuration for a Bent Pipe
model configured with a single transponder in `process` mode.

```xml
  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx freqeuncy Hz>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.frequency'>
    <item value='0:29.910G'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx bandwidth Hz>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.bandwidth'>
    <item value='0:150M'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx action: ubend | process>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.action'>
    <item value='0:process'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<pcr index>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.pcrcurveindex'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
  </paramlist>

 <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<antenna index>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.antenna'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<on | off>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.enable'>
    <item value='0:on'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-01/node-1/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 7-36</p><br>

Comparing the above snippet with the following from `node-2` in the
`bentpipe-02` example, highlights the `transponder.receiver.*`
similarities and differences when configuring multiple transponders
and operating in `ubend` mode -- mainly the number of `<paramlist>`
items with unique transponder indices.

```xml
  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx freqeuncy Hz>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.frequency'>
    <item value='0:29.910G'/>
    <item value='1:29.745G'/>
    <item value='2:29.580G'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx bandwidth Hz>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.bandwidth'>
    <item value='0:150M'/>
    <item value='1:150M'/>
    <item value='2:150M'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<rx action: ubend | process>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.action'>
    <item value='0:ubend'/>
    <item value='1:ubend'/>
    <item value='2:ubend'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<pcr index>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.pcrcurveindex'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
    <item value='1:0'/>
    <item value='2:0'/>
  </paramlist>

 <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<antenna index>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.antenna'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
    <item value='1:1'/>
    <item value='2:2'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<on | off>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.enable'>
    <item value='0:on'/>
    <item value='1:on'/>
    <item value='2:on'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-2/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 7-48</p><br>

### Configurable Channel Access

A transponder can be configured to use either TDMA or No-Protocol (no
channel access) channel access when transmitting. Specifying a
non-`na` value for `transponder.transmit.slotsize`,
`transponder.transmit.slotperframe`, and
`transponder.transmit.txslots` configuration parameters selects TDMA
channel access. Transponders instantiated by a Bent Pipe instance may
have different slot and frame sizes, and different tx slot
allocations.

The following snippet from `node-1` in the `bentpipe-02` example
illustrates the configuration necessary for a TDMA transmit channel
with 10 1000 msec slots per frame and the assigning of individual
transmit slots to `node-1`.

```xml
  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slots | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.txslots'>
    <item value='0:1;3;5;7;9'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slot size | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.slotsize'>
    <item value='0:1000'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slot per frame | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.slotperframe'>
    <item value='0:10'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-1/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 57-71</p><br>

Specifying those same configuration parameters as `na`, as does
`node-3` in the `bentpipe-02` example, selects no-protocol channel
access, which is functionally equivalent to the [RF Pipe Model](rf-pipe-radio-model#rf-pipe-radio-model).

```xml
  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slots | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.txslots'>
    <item value='0:na'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slot size | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.slotsize'>
    <item value='0:na'/>
  </paramlist>

  <!-- syntax: '<transponder id>:<tx slot per frame | na>' -->
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.slotperframe'>
    <item value='0:na'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-3/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 57-71</p><br>


### Multiple Antenna

The Bent Pipe radio model can be configured with multiple antennas
using the configuration parameter `antenna.defines`. Each antenna is
defined as a parameter value entry using the format `<antenna
index>:<antenna definition>`. Where `<antenna index>` is a 0 based
unique index used to identify a specific antenna.

Ideal omni antennas are defined using the following format:

`<antenna index>:omni;<fixed antenna gain dbi>;<spectral mask index>`


Profile defined antennas are defined using the following format:


`<antenna index>:<antenna profile>;<azimuth degrees>;<elevation degrees>;<spectral mask index>`

Below is the antenna definition used by the `node-2` in the
`bentpipe-02` example showing the definition for three profile defined
antennas:

```xml
  <paramlist name='antenna.defines'>
    <item value='0:2;0;0;0'/>
    <item value='1:1;94.34439424144891;-86.98230090133954;0'/>
    <item value='2:1;237.5217814216051;-87.42647720511944;0'/>
  </paramlist>
```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-2/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 131-135</p><br>

A transponder must be associated with a receive and transmit antenna,
which may be the same, using the configuration parameters
`transponder.receive.antenna` and `transponder.transmit.antenna`,
respectively. An antenna is identified by the *antenna index* used in
`antenna.defines`.

Below is the transponder receive and transmit antenna mappings for
`node-2` in the `bentpipe-02` example.

```xml
  <paramlist name='transponder.receive.antenna'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
    <item value='1:1'/>
    <item value='2:2'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-2/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 36-41</p><br>

```xml
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.antenna'>
    <item value='0:0'/>
    <item value='1:2'/>
    <item value='2:1'/>
  </paramlist>

```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/node-2/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 99-104</p><br>

### Aggregation and Fragmentation

The Bent Pipe radio model can be configured to aggregate small
over-the-air messages up to a certain maximum transmission unit (MTU)
and/or fragment ones larger than the same MTU. Aggregation is enabled
using the configuration parameter
`queue.aggregationenable`. Fragmentation is enabled using the
configuration parameter `queue.fragmentationenable`.

MTU definition is transponder specific. When using TDMA channel
access, the MTU is calculated using the
`transponder.transmit.slotsize` and `transponder.transmit.datarate`
configuration parameters. When using no-protocol channel access the
MTU is specified using the configuration parameter
`transponder.transmit.mtu`.

### Boundary Transponder Selection

When using `process` mode, downstream messages that are communicated
to the Bent Pipe model for over-the-air transmission use a TOS or DSCP
mapping to transponder index in order to direct over-the-air messages,
depending on what is provided by the boundary component in use. Both
the [Raw Transport](raw-transport#raw-transport) and [Virtual Transport](virtual-transport#virtual-transport) use DSCP.

The below configuration from `node-1` in the `bentpipe-01` example
directs all downstream over-the-air messages to *transponder 0*.

```xml
  <paramlist name='transponder.transmit.tosmap'>
     <item value='0:0-255'/>
  </paramlist>
```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-01/node-1/emane-bentpipe-radiomodel.xml lines: 87-89</p><br>

### Packet Completion Rate Curves

The Bent Pipe radio model Packet Completion Rate is specified as
curves defined via XML. The curve definitions are composed of a series
of SINR values along with their corresponding probability of reception
for a given index which is assigned to a transponder using the
configuration parameter `transponder.transmit.pcrcurveindex`.

A curve definition must contain a minimum of two points with one SINR
representing *POR = 0* and one SINR representing *POR = 100*. Linear
interpolation is preformed when an exact SINR match is not found.

Specifying a packet size (`<bentpipe-model-pcr>` attribute
`packetsize`) in the curve file will adjust the POR based on received
packet size. Specifying a `packetsize` of 0 disregards received packet
size when computing the POR.

The POR is obtained using the following calculation when a non-zero
`packetsize` is specified:

$$POR = POR_0 ^ {S_1/S_0}$$

Where,

$$POR_0$$ is the POR value determined from the PCR curve for the given SINR value

$$S_0$$ is the packet size specified in the curve file `packetsize`

$$S_1$$ is the received packet size

The below PCR curve file is used by all nodes in
the `bentpipe-01` example. These curves are for illustrative
purposes only. Packet Completion Rate curves should be representative
of the waveform being emulated.

```xml
<bentpipe-model-pcr packetsize="128">
  <curve index="0">
    <entry sinr="-9.0"  por="0.0"/>
    <entry sinr="-8.0"  por="1.4"/>
    <entry sinr="-7.0"  por="21.0"/>
    <entry sinr="-6.0"  por="63.5"/>
    <entry sinr="-5.0"  por="90.7"/>
    <entry sinr="-4.0"  por="98.6"/>
    <entry sinr="-3.0"  por="99.9"/>
    <entry sinr="-2.0"  por="100.0"/>
  </curve>
  <curve index="1">
    <entry sinr="-6.0"  por="0"/>
    <entry sinr="-5.0"  por="1.4"/>
    <entry sinr="-4.0"  por="20.6"/>
    <entry sinr="-3.0"  por="63.1"/>
    <entry sinr="-2.0"  por="90.5"/>
    <entry sinr="-1.0"  por="98.5"/>
    <entry sinr="0.0"   por="99.9"/>
    <entry sinr="1.0"   por="100.0"/>
  </curve>
  <curve index="2">
    <entry sinr="17.0"  por="0.0"/>
    <entry sinr="18.0"  por="0.2"/>
    <entry sinr="19.0"  por="5.7"/>
    <entry sinr="20.0"  por="32.4"/>
    <entry sinr="21.0"  por="71.3"/>
    <entry sinr="22.0"  por="92.4"/>
    <entry sinr="23.0"  por="99.9"/>
    <entry sinr="24.0"  por="100.0"/>
  </curve>
</bentpipe-model-pcr>
```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-01/node-1/emane-bentpipe-pcr.xml</p><br>

{: .warning }
> Packet Completion Rate (PCR) curves should be
representative of the waveform being emulated. The curves used for
Bent Pipe radio model examples are for illustrative purposes only.

## Compatibility

When used with the Bent Pipe radio model:

1. [Physical Layer](physical-layer#physical-layer) configuration parameter
`compatibilitymode` must be set to `2`.

2. [Virtual Transport](virtual-transport#virtual-transport) configuration parameter
`arpcacheenable` must be set to `off`.

## Configuration
1. **`antenna.defines`**: Defines antennas available for use by
   transponders with the following format:
   
   `<antenna index>:(omni,<fixed gain dBi>)|(<antenna profile id,azimuth degrees,elevation degress>),<spectrummask>`
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
   Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
   Regex:   ^\d+:(omni;(-){0,1}\d+(\.\d+){0,1}|\d+;(-){0,1}\d+(\.\d+){0,1};(-){0,1}\d+(\.\d+){0,1});\d+$
   ```

2. **`pcrcurveuri`**: Defines the URI of the Packet Completion Rate
   (PCR) curve file. The PCR curve file contains probability of reception
   curves as a function of Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio
   (SINR).
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,1]               
   ```

3. **`queue.aggregationenable`**: Defines whether packet aggregation
   is enabled for transmission. When enabled, multiple packets up to a
   specified MTU can be sent in the same transmission.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: yes                   Required: no                    Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    bool                  Occurrs:  [1,1]                 Range:      [false,true]        
   Values:  true
   ```

4. **`queue.depth`**: Defines the size of the per transponder
   downstream packet queues in packets.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: yes                   Required: no                    Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    uint16                Occurrs:  [1,1]                 Range:      [0,65535]           
   Values:  256
   ```

5. **`queue.fragmentationenable`**: Defines whether packet
   fragmentation is enabled. When enabled, a single packet larger than a
   specified MTU will be fragmented into multiple message and sent. When
   disabled, packets larger than the MTU will be discarded.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: yes                   Required: no                    Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    bool                  Occurrs:  [1,1]                 Range:      [false,true]        
   Values:  true
   ```

6. **`reassembly.fragmentcheckthreshold`**: Defines the rate in
   seconds a check is performed to see if any packet fragment reassembly
   efforts should be abandoned.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: yes                   Required: no                    Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    uint16                Occurrs:  [1,1]                 Range:      [0,65535]           
   Values:  2
   ```

7. **`reassembly.fragmenttimeoutthreshold`**: Defines the threshold in
   seconds to wait for another packet fragment for an existing reassembly
   effort before abandoning the effort.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: yes                   Required: no                    Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    uint16                Occurrs:  [1,1]                 Range:      [0,65535]           
   Values:  5
   ```

8. **`transponder.receive.action`**: Defines per transponder receive
   action: `ubend` or `process` with the following format:
   
   `<transponder index>:ubend|process`
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
   Regex:   ^\d+:(process|ubend)$
   ```

9. **`transponder.receive.antenna`**: Defines per transponder receive
   antenna with the following format:
   
   `<transponder index>:<antenna index>`
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
   Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
   Regex:   ^\d+:\d+$
   ```

10. **`transponder.receive.bandwidth`**: Defines per transponder
    receive bandwidth in hz with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<frequency hz>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

11. **`transponder.receive.enable`**: Defines per transponder receive
    enable: `yes` or `on`; or `no` or `off` with the format:
    
    `<transponder index>:yes|on|no|off`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(on|off|yes|no)$
    ```

12. **`transponder.receive.frequency`**: Defines per transponder
    receive center frequency in hz with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<frequency hz>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

13. **`transponder.transmit.antenna`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit antenna with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<antenna index>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+$
    ```

14. **`transponder.transmit.bandwidth`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit bandwidth in hz with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<frequency hz>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

15. **`transponder.transmit.datarate`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit datarate in bps with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<datarate bps>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

16. **`transponder.transmit.enable`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit enable: `yes` or `on`; or `no` or `off` with the format:
    
    `<transponder index>:yes|on|no|off`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(on|off|yes|no)$
    ```

17. **`transponder.transmit.frequency`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit center frequency in hz with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<frequency hz>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

18. **`transponder.transmit.mtu`**: Defines per transponder transmit
    mtu in bytes or `na` if using transmit slots with  following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:na|<slot size microseconds>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,max_uint64]      
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|\d+)$
    ```

19. **`transponder.transmit.pcrcurveindex`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit PCR curve index with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<pcrcurveindex>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+$
    ```

20. **`transponder.transmit.power`**: Defines per transponder transmit
    power in dBm with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<power dBm>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:\d+(\.\d+){0,1}(G|M|K){0,1}$
    ```

21. **`transponder.transmit.slotperframe`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit slots per frame with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<slots per frame>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|\d+)$
    ```

22. **`transponder.transmit.slotsize`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit slot size in microseconds or `na` with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:na|<slot size microseconds>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|\d+)$
    ```

23. **`transponder.transmit.tosmap`**: Defines TOS or DSCP mapping to
    transponder index in order to direct downstream frames to the
    appropriate transponder  when operating in `process` mode. Note: TOS
    or DSCP is dictated by the boundary component in use. Specified with
    the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:all|na|[(value|value-value)];...`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: no                  
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|((\d+|\d+-\d+)(;){0,1}){1,})
    ```

24. **`transponder.transmit.txslots`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit slots with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:[slot|slot-slot];...`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|(\d+|\d+-\d+)(;(\d+|\d+-\d+)){0,})$
    ```

25. **`transponder.transmit.ubend.delay`**: Defines per transponder
    transmit u-bend delay in microseconds. Applicable when associated
    `transponder.receive.action` is `ubend` with the following format:
    
    `<transponder index>:<delay microseconds>`
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Default: no                    Required: yes                   Modifiable: yes                 
    Type:    string                Occurrs:  [1,65535]           
    Regex:   ^\d+:(na|\d+)$
    ```



## Statistics
1. **`avgProcessAPIQueueDepth`**: Average API queue depth for a
   processUpstreamPacket, processUpstreamControl,
   processDownstreamPacket, processDownstreamControl, processEvent and
   processTimedEvent.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: double                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

2. **`avgProcessAPIQueueWait`**: Average API queue wait for a
   processUpstreamPacket, processUpstreamControl,
   processDownstreamPacket, processDownstreamControl, processEvent and
   processTimedEvent in microseconds.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: double                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

3. **`avgTimedEventLatency`**: Average latency between the scheduled
   timer expiration and the actual firing over the requested duration.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: double                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

4. **`avgTimedEventLatencyRatio`**: Average ratio of the delta between
   the scheduled timer expiration and the actual firing over the
   requested duration. An average ratio approaching 1 indicates that
   timer latencies are large in comparison to the requested durations.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: double                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

5. **`numAPIQueued`**: The number of queued API events.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

6. **`processedConfiguration`**: The number of processed
   configuration.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

7. **`processedDownstreamControl`**: The number of processed
   downstream control.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

8. **`processedDownstreamPackets`**: The number of processed
   downstream packets.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

9. **`processedEvents`**: The number of processed events.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
   ```

10. **`processedTimedEvents`**: The number of processed timed events.
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
    ```

11. **`processedUpstreamControl`**: The number of processed upstream
    control.
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
    ```

12. **`processedUpstreamPackets`**: The number of processed upstream
    packets.
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Type: uint64                Clearable: yes                 
    ```



## Statistic Tables
1. **`AntennaStatusTable`**: Antenna status table
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

2. **`BroadcastByteAcceptTable0`**: Broadcast bytes accepted
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  yes
   ```

3. **`BroadcastByteDropTable0`**: Broadcast bytes dropped
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  yes
   ```

4. **`EventReceptionTable`**: Received event counts
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  yes
   ```

5. **`NeighborStatusTable`**: Neighbor status table
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

6. **`QueueAggregateHistogram`**: Shows a per transponder histogram of
   the number of message components contained in an single over-the-air
   frame.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

7. **`QueueFragmentHistogram`**: Shows a per transponder histogram of
   the number of message components required to transmit a single packet
   over-the-air.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

8. **`QueueStatusTable`**: Shows for each Transponder queue the number
   of packets enqueued, dequeued, dropped due to queue overflow
   (enqueue), dropped due to too big, (dequeue), depth, and high water
   mark.
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

9. **`TransponderStatusExTable`**: Transponder status extented table
   
   ```no-highlighting
   Clearable:  no
   ```

10. **`TransponderStatusTable`**: Transponder status table
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Clearable:  no
    ```

11. **`TxSlotStatusTable`**: Shows the number of Tx slot opportunities
    per transponder that were valid or missed based on slot timing
    deadlines
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Clearable:  no
    ```

12. **`UnicastByteAcceptTable0`**: Unicast bytes accepted
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Clearable:  yes
    ```

13. **`UnicastByteDropTable0`**: Unicast bytes dropped
    
    ```no-highlighting
    Clearable:  yes
    ```



## Examples

This guide includes two Bent Pipe examples:

1. `bentpipe-01`: A two node example where both nodes use a single
   transponder in `process` mode.

2. `bentpipe-02`: A three node example where two ground stations, each
   with a single transponder in `process` mode, communicate through a
   satellite with three transponders in `ubend` mode.

### bentpipe-01

![](images/auto-generated-topology-bentpipe-01.png){: width="65%"; .centered}
<p style="text-align:center;font-size:75%">bentpipe-01 experiment components</p><br>

The `bentpipe-01` example contains two ground nodes, each with a host
hanging off their respective `lan0` interface. Both nodes use a single
transponder in `process` mode.

All physical layers are configured to use the `precomputed` propagation
model and `emaneeventservice` publishes [`PathlossEvents`](events#pathlossevent)
using the values in `pathloss.eel`.

```text
0.0 nem:1 pathloss nem:2,87.0
```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-01/pathloss.eel</p><br>

This experiment illustrates the versatility of the Bent Pipe model in
`process` mode, allowing its use in a similar fashion as you would the
 [RF Pipe](rf-pipe-radio-model#rf-pipe-radio-model) radio model.

![](images/auto-generated-run-bentpipe-01.png){:width="75%"; .centered}

With `emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-01` running, we can query `node-1` to
take a look at its transponder configuration.

```text
$ emanesh node-1 get table nems mac TransponderStatusTable TransponderStatusExTable  AntennaStatusTable
nem 1   mac AntennaStatusTable
| Index | Profile | Bandwidth | Rx Frequency | Fixed Gain | Azimuth | Elevation | Mask |
| 0     | NA      | 150000000 | 29910000000  | 0.5        | NA      | NA        | 0    |

nem 1   mac TransponderStatusExTable
| Idx | Tx U_Delay | Tx Slots/Frame | Tx Slot Size | MTU  |
| 0   | 0          | 0              | 0            | 2048 |

nem 1   mac TransponderStatusTable
|Idx|Rx Hz      |Rx Bw    |Rx Ant|Rx Enable|Action |Tx Hz      |Tx Bw    |Tx Bps   |Tx Ant|Tx dBm|Tx Enable|
|0  |29910000000|150000000|0     |on       |process|29910000000|150000000|200000000|0     |0.0   |on       |
```

From these tables we see that `node-1` has an ideal omni antenna with
a fixed gain of 0.5 dBi using the default spectral mask; a single
transponder tuned to transmit and receive at 29.910 GHz with both a
transmit and receive bandwidth of 150 MHz; receives and transmits
using the same antenna; uses no-protocol channel access, and is
configured in `process` mode. Querying `node-2` will show similar
configuration.

We can verify connectivity between the attached `lan0` hosts using `ping`:

```text
$ ssh host-1 ping -R -c 5  host-2-lan
PING host-2-lan (10.98.2.2) 56(124) bytes of data.
64 bytes from host-2-lan (10.98.2.2): icmp_seq=1 ttl=62 time=1.23 ms
RR:     host-1-lan (10.98.1.2)
        radio-1 (10.100.0.1)
        radio-2-lan (10.98.2.1)
        host-2-lan (10.98.2.2)
        host-2-lan (10.98.2.2)
        radio-2 (10.100.0.2)
        radio-1-lan (10.98.1.1)
        host-1-lan (10.98.1.2)

64 bytes from host-2-lan (10.98.2.2): icmp_seq=2 ttl=62 time=2.23 ms    (same route)
64 bytes from host-2-lan (10.98.2.2): icmp_seq=3 ttl=62 time=2.33 ms    (same route)
64 bytes from host-2-lan (10.98.2.2): icmp_seq=4 ttl=62 time=2.15 ms    (same route)
64 bytes from host-2-lan (10.98.2.2): icmp_seq=5 ttl=62 time=2.18 ms    (same route)

--- host-2-lan ping statistics ---
5 packets transmitted, 5 received, 0% packet loss, time 4006ms
rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 1.231/2.023/2.325/0.400 ms
```


### bentpipe-02

![](images/auto-generated-topology-bentpipe-02.png){: width="65%"; .centered}
<p style="text-align:center;font-size:75%">bentpipe-02 experiment components</p><br>

The `bentpipe-02` example experiment contains two ground nodes, each
with a host hanging off their respective `lan0` interface, and one
satellite node.

The ground nodes have a single transponder, with `node-1` using TDMA
channel access and `node-3` using no-protocol channel access. The
satellite node has three transponders and three antennas. *Transponder
0* uses a profile defined omni antenna, and *transponder 1* and
*transponder 2* both make use of the other two directional antennas,
where one antenna points at `node-1` and the other at `node-3`. All
satellite transponders use no-protocol channel access.

All physical layers are configured to use the `freespace` propagation
model and `emaneeventservice` publishes [`LocationEvents`](events#locationevent)
using the locations in `locations.eel`.

```text
# Carl Sagan final resting place
0.0 nem:1 location gps 42.4563980,-76.4930115,10.0

# satellite: somewhere over midwest USA
0.0 nem:2 location gps 46.349795,-100.219587,35786000.0

# area 51
0.0 nem:3 location gps 37.274043,-115.799030,10.0
```
<p style="float:right;font-family:courier;font-size:75%">emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02/locations.eel</p><br>

![](images/auto-generated-run-bentpipe-02.png){:width="75%"; .centered}

With `emane-guide/examples/bentpipe-02` running, we can query `node-2` to
take a look at its transponder configuration. 

```text
$ emanesh node-2 get table nems mac TransponderStatusTable TransponderStatusExTable  AntennaStatusTable
nem 2   mac AntennaStatusTable
| Index | Profile | Bandwidth | Rx Frequency | Fixed Gain | Azimuth           | Elevation          | Mask |
| 0     | 2       | 150000000 | 29910000000  | NA         | 0.0               | 0.0                | 0    |
| 1     | 1       | 150000000 | 29745000000  | NA         | 94.34439424144891 | -86.98230090133954 | 0    |
| 2     | 1       | 150000000 | 29580000000  | NA         | 237.5217814216051 | -87.42647720511944 | 0    |

nem 2   mac TransponderStatusExTable
| Idx | Tx U_Delay | Tx Slots/Frame | Tx Slot Size | MTU  |
| 0   | 0          | 0              | 0            | 2048 |
| 1   | 0          | 0              | 0            | 2048 |
| 2   | 0          | 0              | 0            | 2048 |

nem 2   mac TransponderStatusTable
|Idx|Rx Hz      |Rx Bw    |Rx Ant|Rx Enable|Action|Tx Hz      |Tx Bw    |Tx Bps   |Tx Ant|Tx dBm|Tx Enable|
|0  |29910000000|150000000|0     |on       |ubend |20175000000|150000000|100000000|0     |54.0  |on       |
|1  |29745000000|150000000|1     |on       |ubend |20340000000|150000000|100000000|2     |54.0  |on       |
|2  |29580000000|150000000|2     |on       |ubend |20505000000|150000000|100000000|1     |54.0  |on       |
```

From these three tables we see that `node-2` has three antennas, all
of which are profile defined and use the default spectral mask; three
transponders in `ubend` mode, where *transponder 0* uses *antenna 0*
for receive and transmit, *transponder 1* receives on *antenna 1* and
transmits on *antenna 2*, and *transponder 2* receives on *antenna 2*
and transmits on *antenna 1*; and all transponders use no-protocol
channel access.

The satellite node, `node-2`, does not have an attached host. Any
over-the-air message it receives on a transponder will be relayed
(*bent*) back over-the-air using the transponder's associated transmit
antenna.

Using `ping` to verify connectivity the same way we did in the
`bentpipe-01` example shows a less than complete topology picture due
to the fact that the relay occurs in the radio model not `node-2`'s
kernel space, so route records for `node-2` are not added to the ICMP
messages.

```text
$ ssh host-1 ping -R -c 5  host-3-lan
PING host-3-lan (10.98.3.2) 56(124) bytes of data.
64 bytes from host-3-lan (10.98.3.2): icmp_seq=1 ttl=62 time=967 ms
RR:     host-1-lan (10.98.1.2)
        radio-1 (10.100.0.1)
        radio-3-lan (10.98.3.1)
        host-3-lan (10.98.3.2)
        host-3-lan (10.98.3.2)
        radio-3 (10.100.0.3)
        radio-1-lan (10.98.1.1)
        host-1-lan (10.98.1.2)

64 bytes from host-3-lan (10.98.3.2): icmp_seq=2 ttl=62 time=484 ms     (same route)
64 bytes from host-3-lan (10.98.3.2): icmp_seq=3 ttl=62 time=482 ms     (same route)
64 bytes from host-3-lan (10.98.3.2): icmp_seq=4 ttl=62 time=484 ms     (same route)
64 bytes from host-3-lan (10.98.3.2): icmp_seq=5 ttl=62 time=483 ms     (same route)

--- host-3-lan ping statistics ---
5 packets transmitted, 5 received, 0% packet loss, time 4002ms
rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 482.364/580.068/966.982/193.458 ms
```

We can verify the topology using the `NeighborStatusTable` for all 3 nodes.

```text
$ for i in $(seq 1 3); do emanesh node-$i get table nems mac NeighborStatusTable; done
nem 1   mac NeighborStatusTable
|NEM|Transponder|SINR_wma         |NF_wma             |Samples|SINR_avg         |NF_avg             |Timestamp       |
|2  |0          |11.29777283855799|-118.63908740944319|7      |11.29777283855799|-118.63908740944318|1686943938679630|

nem 2   mac NeighborStatusTable
|NEM|Transponder|SINR_wma         |NF_wma             |Samples|SINR_avg         |NF_avg             |Timestamp       |
|1  |1          |8.066688845808386|-118.63908740944319|7      |8.066688845808386|-118.63908740944318|1686943938801503|
|3  |2          |8.137849777137916|-118.63908740944319|7      |8.137849777137916|-118.63908740944318|1686943938558921|

nem 3   mac NeighborStatusTable
|NEM|Transponder|SINR_wma          |NF_wma             |Samples|SINR_avg          |NF_avg             |Timestamp       |
|2  |0          |11.390794198620853|-118.63908740944319|7      |11.390794198620853|-118.63908740944318|1686943938921888|
```

Taking a look at `node-2`, we see that it sees `node-1` on
*transponder 1* and `node-3` on *transponder 2*. Both `node-1` and
`node-2` see `node-3` on their respective *transponder 0*.

We can use `emanesh` and change the frequencies of all three nodes in
order to switch the `ubend` on node-2 to *transponder 0*, which uses
the profile defined omni antenna, *antenna 0*.

```text
$ emanesh node-1 set config nems mac \
   transponder.receive.frequency=0:29.910G \
   transponder.transmit.frequency=0:29.910G
nem 1   mac  configuration updated

$ emanesh node-2 set config nems mac \
    transponder.receive.frequency="0:29.910G,1:29.745G,2:29.580G" \
    transponder.transmit.frequency="0:29.910G,1:20.340G,2:20.505G"
nem 2   mac  configuration updated

$ emanesh node-3 set config nems mac \
    transponder.receive.frequency=0:29.910G \
    transponder.transmit.frequency=0:29.910G
nem 3   mac  configuration updated
```

Notice how even though we only want to change the frequency of
`node-2`'s *transponder 0*, we still have to specify values for all
three transponders since `transponder.receive.frequency` and
`transponder.transmit.frequency` are configuration parameters that
hold multiple values.

Similarly, if we want to change the antenna associated with `node-2`'s
*transponder 0* to an ideal omni, we need to specify the other antenna
defines still in use:

```text
$ emanesh node-2 set config nems mac \
    antenna.defines="0:omni;24.25;0,1:1;94.34439424144891;-86.98230090133954;0,2:1;237.5217814216051;-87.42647720511944;0"
```

Repeat the same `ping` command to verify connectivity.

```text
$ host-1 ping -R -c 5  host-3-lan
```

Looking at `node-2`'s `AntennaStatusTable` and `NeighborStatusTable`,
we can see that *antenna 0* is now an ideal omni indicated by the `NA`
in the `Profile` column, and `node-2` sees `node-1` and `node-3` via
*transponder 0*.

```text
$ emanesh node-2 get table nems mac NeighborStatusTable AntennaStatusTable
nem 2   mac AntennaStatusTable
| Index | Profile | Bandwidth | Rx Frequency | Fixed Gain | Azimuth           | Elevation          | Mask |
| 0     | NA      | 150000000 | 29910000000  | 24.25      | NA                | NA                 | 0    |
| 1     | 1       | 150000000 | 29745000000  | NA         | 94.34439424144891 | -86.98230090133954 | 0    |
| 2     | 1       | 150000000 | 29580000000  | NA         | 237.5217814216051 | -87.42647720511944 | 0    |

nem 2   mac NeighborStatusTable
|NEM| Transponder| SINR_wma         | NF_wma             | Samples| SINR_avg         | NF_avg             | Timestamp       |
|1  | 0          | 8.018640050401672| -118.63908740944318| 908    | 8.018640050401698| -118.63908740944602| 1687204399299503|
|1  | 1          | 8.066688845808386| -118.63908740944318| 38     | 8.06668884580838 | -118.63908740944319| 1687203545323503|
|3  | 0          | 8.041484909729036| -118.63908740944318| 909    | 8.041484909728947| -118.63908740944602| 1687204400057385|
|3  | 2          | 8.137849777137916| -118.63908740944318| 38     | 8.137849777137921| -118.63908740944319| 1687203545081237|
```

The `NeighborStatusTable` does not delete entries. Use the `Timestamp`
column value to determine an entry has gone stale, i.e. not updated in
some time.
